README.md, before:

# Liipi - Park and Ride API [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI) [![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI/badge.png?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/r/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI?branch=master)

HSL open source project to collect and share parking capacity information. 

The service can be found at <https://p.hsl.fi>

API documentation can be found at <https://p.hsl.fi/docs>


## Development

To build the project, you will need [Docker](https://www.docker.com/community-edition). For development outside Docker, you will also need [Java 8](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html), [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/), [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) and [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/). 

Building the project

    docker-compose build

Starting the application

    docker-compose up -d db api web

The web application will run on <http://localhost:8080> and the PostgreSQL database on `localhost:5432`

Running UI tests

    docker-compose run --rm test

Tagging the temporary Docker containers which were used for building the app, so that the dependency cache will survive `docker image prune`  

    ./cache-builder-images.sh 

Running tests against PostgreSQL (after caching builder images)

    docker-compose up -d db
    docker run --rm -v "$PWD:/project" --network host liipi-api-builder-cache mvn clean verify -P psql


### Developing locally, outside Docker

Build the API backend

    mvn clean verify

The test output will be saved in `target/surefire-reports`

Run tests against PostgreSQL (default is H2)

    mvn clean verify -P psql

Build the web frontend

    cd web
    yarn install
    yarn run build


### Running UI tests locally

Preparations

    cd test
    yarn install
    yarn run webdriver-update
    yarn run webdriver-start

Running tests

    yarn run test

Running only some tests

    yarn run test --specs specs/auth/auth.spec.js


# Deployment

Publish the latest built images as version 123

    ./publish.sh 123


# License

Copyright © 2015-2018 [HSL](https://www.hsl.fi/)

The source code of this program is dual-licensed under the [EUPL v1.2](LICENSE-EUPL.txt) and [AGPLv3](LICENSE-AGPL.txt) licenses.

The data hosted in this service is licensed under the [CC BY 4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.

Commit message:

chore(dev): developer version of the web frontend

README.md, after:

# Liipi - Park and Ride API [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI) [![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI/badge.png?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/r/HSLdevcom/parkandrideAPI?branch=master)

HSL open source project to collect and share parking capacity information. 

The service can be found at <https://p.hsl.fi>

API documentation can be found at <https://p.hsl.fi/docs>


## Development

To build the project, you will need [Docker](https://www.docker.com/community-edition). For development outside Docker, you will also need [Java 8](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html), [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/), [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) and [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/). 

Building the project

    docker-compose build

Starting the application

    docker-compose up -d db api web

The web application will run on <http://localhost:8080> and the PostgreSQL database on `localhost:5432`

Running UI tests

    docker-compose run --rm test

Tagging the temporary Docker containers which were used for building the app, so that the dependency cache will survive `docker image prune`  

    ./cache-builder-images.sh 

Running tests against PostgreSQL (after caching builder images)

    docker-compose up -d db
    docker run --rm -v "$PWD:/project" --network host liipi-api-builder-cache mvn clean verify -P psql


### Developing locally, outside Docker

Build the API backend

    mvn clean verify

The test output will be saved in `target/surefire-reports`

Run tests against PostgreSQL (default is H2)

    mvn clean verify -P psql

Build the web frontend

    cd web
    yarn install
    yarn run build

Developer version of the web frontend, proxying the API backend in port 8080 on the host machine (running in your IDE). The web application will run on <http://localhost:8081> 

    docker-compose up -d webdev

> TODO: There is some live reloading support in the old Grunt build (`yarn run autobuild`), but it doesn't work properly. Grunt is outdated, so consider upgrading to Webpack and webpack-dev-server.  


### Running UI tests locally

Preparations

    cd test
    yarn install
    yarn run webdriver-update
    yarn run webdriver-start

Running tests

    yarn run test

Running only some tests

    yarn run test --specs specs/auth/auth.spec.js


# Deployment

Publish the latest built images as version 123

    ./publish.sh 123


# License

Copyright © 2015-2018 [HSL](https://www.hsl.fi/)

The source code of this program is dual-licensed under the [EUPL v1.2](LICENSE-EUPL.txt) and [AGPLv3](LICENSE-AGPL.txt) licenses.

The data hosted in this service is licensed under the [CC BY 4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
